Statistical models can play many
different roles in a data analysis.
In this lecture I'll talk about how to use
statistical models to explore your data.
So exploratory data analysis
can have two broad goals.
The first is more basic where it's you
determine whether you have the right data
to answer your question.
And part of exploratory analysis is to
determine do you need to get more data,
do you need to change datasets, or
do you need to change your question or
refine your question.
So what I'm gonna talk about in this
lecture is really how do we develop
a sketch of a solution to your question,
assume your question is appropriate and
is answerable,
we want to start sketching out a solution.
So in many ways this is
like with film-making,
you want to make a rough
cut of your movie, right?
So the idea is it's not gonna
be the final product, but
it's gonna give you a sense of how
things flow and how things work.
And if you're gonna make an argument
to someone, you're gonna argue for
doing this versus that and you wanna
build evidence to make your case,
this is gonna be a basic sketch of
how that argument's gonna work out.
Okay?
So that's what we'll talk
about in this lecture.
And so this lecture is really
about using statistical models
to help you to summarize your data, and
to eventually kind of make things to
things like make inference, okay.
So the first thing we need to talk
about is what is a model, okay, and
why do we need them, okay.
So, models are generally speaking
are just constructs that we build
to help us understand the real world,
okay.
So for example, in biology often people
will use mice as models for humans.
So we can't do experiments on humans so
we'll use,
we sometimes people do
experiments on mice to use,
to kind of give us sense of what
might happen in a human being.
For example, for
things like drug development or whatever.
Now, so that's a very,
that's a physical type of model.
We're not going to be talking about
those kind of models of course.
But the models that we use
are mathematical models in many cases.
And we use them to help tell,
to kind of help us describe
the population that we're talking about.
So if there's a population out there that
we're trying to make inferences to, or
to describe in some way,
we use a model to kind of help us do that.
Because often the population is too
complex to think about all at once.
So imagine if you're trying to make a
statement about the entire United States,
everyone in the United States, okay.
All the things that might go
on between all the 300 or so
million people in the United States,
it's impossible to think about.
So we need a model to
help us simplify that,
to allow us to think about it
in a kind of a reasonable way.
The ideas of the models will stand in for
the population.
And they're a much simpler form than
what might actually be going on
in the population.
But they represent population features and
relationships, okay.
And the models help us by imposing
structure on the population, so
we might for example assume that things
are linearly related to each other.
We don't necessarily know that, but
it helps us to simplify how we think about
two different variables in the population.
And the important thing to realize, and
this is a well worn saying
in the field of statistics.
Is that, all models are wrong,
but some are useful.
So, it's important not to get hung
up on finding the right model.
But rather to focus on developing
a model that's actually useful
to help you tell your story
about the population.
So it might be useful
to start at this point,
which I think it was to ask what's
it like to have no model at all?
Okay.
So that way you get a sense of
kind of how bad things can be or
how difficult it might be if
you didn't ever use a model.
Okay.
So just take this as a basic example.
Suppose you're developing a new product,
and
you want to know how much people would
be willing to pay for this new product.
So something you might do is
just put out a simple survey,
you might survey 20 people, and
that may be a representative
of the the larger population of people
that would be willing to buy this product.
And ask them how much they
would be willing to pay.
And so you do the survey and
then someone comes at you and says,
okay well what did the data say?
Okay, what did they tell us?
Now so as an example, I recently
published a book called R Programming for
Data Science.
And before it was published,
on the website,
you could ask people to put their names,
their email addresses and
ask them how much they'd be willing to
pay for this book before it goes on sale.
And so here's what the data looked like.
So these are 20 numbers from
the survey that was put out on
the website about my book, okay?
So this is life without a model, okay?
The answer to what did the data tell us.
It's in here somewhere,
because this is the data.
It has to be in here somewhere.
But the problem is, so this is, there's
no model to help us think about the data.
So this is what I would call the trivial
model, meaning that there's no model.
Okay?
And the problem is the trivial
model is not useful.
Because it doesn't provide any summary or
any data reduction.
Okay?
So put it this way, if all models
are gonna be wrong, you might as well
try to find something that's useful.
Rather than have no model at all that's
almost certainly not going to be useful.
All right?
So just for the sake of example,
let's use the normal model.
So, the normal model is based
on the normal distribution, and
it's the familiar bell curve that
we've seen many, many times.
Okay?
The nice thing about the normal
model is that it only requires
two parameters to estimate.
There's the mean, and
the standard deviation, okay?
And we can estimate that from the data
by just calculating the mean and
the standard deviation in the usual way.
So the first question we want to ask is,
what do we expect to see?
If the population were truly
coming from a normal distribution,
what would that look like, okay?
And it's always important
to set expectations for
models, so I know it's very tempting
to get right into the data and
see what they look like, but you gotta
be able to set your expectations.
Appropriately, so that you know whether
you're right or wrong in the end, okay?
So here's what we would expect the data
to look like if they were drawn from,
as representative samples
from the population
that was governed by
a normal distribution.
So here's the normal curve.
It probably looks very familiar to you.
Now models are very useful,
because they can tell us a lot of
different things about the population.
For example, this model, the normal model,
says that 68% of the population of readers
would be willing to pay between $6 and
81 cents, and $27 and 59 cents,
okay, how do we know that?
Because that's what the normal
distribution based on this data set
tells us about the population, okay?
We can use the models to compute other
quantities too, for example we might want
to know how many people will be
willing to pay more than $30.
So we can use the normal
distribution to say that 11% of
the population would be
willing to pay more than 30.
So that's useful to know.
Now, the one thing about this picture
that you have to just remember
is that there is no data in this picture.
Now we use the data to draw the picture,
because we use the data to calculate
the mean and the standard deviation.
But there's no actual
data in this picture.
So just keep that in mind.
Now, but
eventually we'll look at the data.
And we want to know how that
data matches our expectation,
which is what this picture is giving us.
Now before we actually get to the data,
one of the things I just want to do is to
show you, what would data look like if it
came from a normal distribution, okay?
Now the nice thing about most software
packages now is that we could just
simulate the error from a normal
distribution and see what it looks like.
So here's what that picture looks like.
I've made a histogram of 20
data points that come from
exactly a normal distribution.
And I plotted the theoretical
normal curve over.
You can see that the histogram and
the blue curve match very
nicely with each other.
This is all very nice and
ideal because it's simulated, okay?
So this is what I call,
drawing a fake picture, okay?
Drawing a fake picture I
find to be terribly useful
because it really helps
to set expectations.
And sometimes its okay to even
literally just draw it with your hand.
You don't have to
necessarily use a computer.
But draw a fake picture of what
you're expecting to see with
the actual data okay?
So this is what normal data looks like,
if we see a histogram it
kinda looks like this.
We might think okay a normal distribution
is a pretty reasonable approximation for
the dataset okay?
So, now one thing that we can
see from the fake picture
is that the normal distribution probably
isn't going to be perfect from the get-go.
Because in particularly you can
see on the left-hand side there
that there are negative values, okay?
[LAUGH] And it doesn't seem plausible
that people would be willing to pay
negative dollars for this book.
And so maybe that's probably not the best
model, but it may be still useful.
Remember that no model is
going to be right, but
it may actually still be useful for
helping us summarize the data.
Okay, so here's what the data
actually looked like, okay?
I've got a histogram of all of the data
points that were from the survey.
This is 20 data points.
And I've overlaid it with the blue curve,
the normal distribution,
that's fitted to the data.
So you have to ask yourself
how does the data match
up with this normal distribution,
with this model, okay?
Now, given what we've seen before
with the theoretical normal curve,
with the fake data and
the fake picture that we showed,
how does this picture compare
to the fake picture, okay?
Now, you might think it doesn't look
that good, actually, [LAUGH] right?
So what's wrong with this picture?
Well, you got this huge spike in
the histogram at around $10, okay?
That's not predicted by the volume,
the normal distribution doesn't have
a huge spike right there, and furthermore,
there are no values that are either close
to zero or negative, whereas the normal
distribution has all these negative
values in its functional form.
So it doesn't look like
the histogram really fits that well.
So what are we going to do about that?
So there may be multiple problems.
There may be multiple explanations for
why the histogram from the data
doesn't look like what we'd expect
from a normal distribution.
For starters, the data may not even
be representative of the population.
This is just a website that was up there
and anyone who just happened to come by
could fill in their name and
say what price they'd be willing to pay.
Who knows who these people were, who knows
if they were even prospective customers,
people who would actually buy the product?
So that the data collection process
might have been very skewed.
We have no real way of knowing that.
But on the other hand it could be that the
model clearly just does not fit well and
we may need to revise the model too.
It may be easier in some circumstances to
revise the model than to revise the data,
especially at the data collection process.
Is very expensive, okay?
So one of the things we can do is
let's try the gamma distribution.
Okay, so the gamma distribution
is another model and
one of its key features is that it
only allows for positive values.
So unlike the normal which has
negative and positive values.
The gamma distribution only
allows positive values.
So then we can just repeat all the steps
that we just went right through.
We can set expectations.
We can draw a fake picture and then we
can compare our expectations to the data.
Okay.
So, I'll skip the first two steps there,
and I'll just show you,
here's what the picture
looks like with the data,
and the gamma distribution that's
fitted on top of it, okay?
So you can see from this picture that
the fit's not perfect either, okay?
Maybe, you could argue
it's a little bit better,
you've got a little hump
wherever that spike at ten is.
But it's not, it doesnt exactly fit it
perfectly, and still you have a bunch of,
the curve, is kind of covering values
where there's no data between the zero and
five range.
And now, but the important thing is
that we have a different model, and so
a different model is gonna
yield different predictions.
So this model is telling us something
completely different about the population
than the normal model was, right?
So the normal model told us there was
gonna be a big hump kind of around 20.
But this model tells us that the hump's
more like around seven and ten.
Okay?
So the model is telling us something very
different about what the population is
willing to pay for this product.
Okay?
For example,
before we said that 11% of people
would be willing to pay more than $30.
However, if we use the gamma model
we find that only 7% of people would
be willing to pay more than $30.
So the importance of using models,
different types of models is that
they tell you very different
things about the population, and
they result in very different predictions.
And so, if you're interested in
making these predictions and
being accurate about them, you want
to make sure you have a model that's
reasonably a reasonable
approximation of the population.
And you can use the data to
help you see if that fits well.
Now we have looked at two
different types of models
to tell us about our data and
to tell us about the population, okay?
So now you may want to keep, continue to
refine this, think about different models.
Obviously this last one didn't really
fit perfectly, so you might wanna
either refine your model or you might want
to do another survey to get more data,
to get a better sense and so you kind
of think about where you go from here.
The point of this whole exercise
is that you get a little sketch
of where you're gonna go and
kinda what your solution's gonna be.
If your question was originally,
how much are people willing to pay for
this product,
you have a better sense now in terms of
what the shape of that
distribution might look like.
And what the population
might be willing to do.
From here where you go, it depends.
You may have enough information
as it is to kind of set prices or
to figure out how your
marketing campaign's gonna go.
Or you might want to go
into more formal modeling.
So you can test the sensitivity
of your assumptions,
of your expectations to various features.
So that's what we'll talk about more
when we talk about formal modeling.